Tutorial: Authenticate to private Git registries in your GitHub Actions workflows (#111)
microsoft/vcpkg-docs: vcpkg/consuming-packages/configure-git-authentication-in-github-actions.md

---
title: Configure Git authentication in GitHub Actions
description: Learn to configure Git credentials for private repositories when using vcpkg on GitHub Actions
author: vicroms
ms.author: viromer
ms.date: 7/20/2023
ms.prod: vcpkg
---
# Configure Git authentication in GitHub Actions

When using vcpkg with private registries it is necessary to provide access
credentials to authenticate Git operations executed internally by vcpkg.

In this article we will show you how to authenticate to a private vcpkg registry

> hosted on GitHub to use in your GitHub Actions workflows.

Reviewer: What happens if you do this for a publicly visible vcpkg registry? Anything bad?

Author: Nothing bad happens, but authenticating to public repositories is unnecessary.

## Step 1: Create a Personal Access Token for your private repository

The first step is to create a Personal Access Token (PAT) for your GitHub account.

- Log into GitHub using an account with access to the private repository.
- Go to <https://github.com/settings>
- Click on _Developer Settings_
- Click on _Tokens (classic)_
- Click the _Generate new token (classic)_

> - Give your token appropiate description, expiration date, and permissions. Make

Reviewer 2: "an appropriate description": should have "an" and fix typo

  sure that the `repo` permission is enabled, this will give the PAT full access
  to your private repositories.
- Click on _Generate token_
- Copy and paste the generated PAT in a secure location, you won't be able to
  view it again after leaving the current page

> - (Optional) If your organization uses SSO, you need to enable it for the PAT

Reviewer: I hesitate to reproduce detailed steps like these in our documentation when GitHub's documentation is likely to be less brittle when they make changes in the future. Especially so when it comes to authentication/authorization features.

Maybe https://docs.github.com/authentication/keeping-your-account-and-data-secure/managing-your-personal-access-tokens

Author: > Is it possible/meaningful to generalize this to work for other hosts of private registries (such as an AzDO hosted registry).

We can add a note that the steps here should work with any Git registry regardless of the hosting service. I chose to use GitHub specifically to have an end-to-end scenario.

I agree with removing the steps to get a PAT from this article in favor of linking to GitHub's documentation.

### Step 2: Create a secret to use in your workflow

> !NOTE

> > Never store a GitHub Personal Access Token in your repository files

Reviewer 3: Maybe this NOTE should move to the above step?

Author: Great suggestion

Now that you have a PAT, you need to create a repository secret to use in your workflows.

- Go to your repository's page on GitHub
- Click on the _Settings_ tab

> - Expand the  _Secrets and variables_ menu in the _Security_ section

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- Under the _Security_ section, expand the  _Secrets and variables_ menu
```

- Click on _Actions_
- Click on _New repository secret_

> - Paste your PAT and give the secret an appropiate name, for example: `private_registry_pat`

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- Paste your PAT and provide a meaningful name for the secret, for example: `private_registry_pat`
```

> - Click on _Add secret_

Reviewer: Same comment about linking directly to the secrets management documentation.

See https://docs.github.com/actions/security-guides/encrypted-secrets

An additional benefit here would be that users may opt for an environment or organization secret rather than a repository secret.

### Step 3: Add Git authentication in your workflow

> Now is time to add an authentication step to your workflow, use the following template
> in your workflow's YAML file. This step should run before any other step that invokes
> vcpkg.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Use the following template to add an authentication step to your workflow's YAML file. This step should run before any other step that invokes vcpkg.
```

```yml
    - name: Authenticate private registries
      shell: bash
      run: git config --global credential.<url>.helper '!f() { echo username=unused; echo password=${{secrets.<pat variable>}}; }; f'
```

> 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Replace _\<url\>_ with the appropriate repository url and _\<pat variable\>_ with the name you provided for the secret in Step 2.
```
